Initial import (#1)
vertx-howtos/openj9-howto: README.adoc

= Running Eclipse Vert.x applications with Eclipse OpenJ9
:author: Julien Ponge <julien.ponge@gmail.com>
:page-permalink: /
:page-github: vertx-howtos/openj9-howto

This how-to provides some tips for running Vert.x applications with https://www.eclipse.org/openj9/[OpenJ9], an alternative Java Virtual Machine built on top of OpenJDK that is gentle on memory usage.

Vert.x is a resource-efficient toolkit for building all kinds of modern distributed applications, and OpenJ9 is a resource-efficient runtime that is well-suited for virtualized and containerized deployments.

== What you will build and run

* You will build a simple micro-service that computes the sum of 2 numbers through a HTTP JSON endpoint.

> * We will check the options for improving startup time with OpenJ9.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We will look at the options for improving startup time with OpenJ9.
```

* We will measure the https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resident_set_size[resident set size] memory footprint on OpenJ9 under a workload.
* You will build a Docker image for the micro-service and OpenJ9.
* We will discuss how to improve the startup time of Docker containers and how to tune OpenJ9 in that environment.

== What you need

- A text editor or IDE
- Java 8 higher

> - OpenJ9 (we recommend a build from https://adoptopenjdk.net/[AdoptOpenJDK])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- OpenJ9 (we recommend a build from https://adoptopenjdk.net/?jvmVariant=openj9[AdoptOpenJDK])
```

Author: I'd rather leave people pick the OpenJDK base version that they want.

Reviewer: Right. So I updated the `url` so that it still forces the `openj9` variant.

- Maven or Gradle
- Docker
- https://locust.io/[Locust] to generate some workload

== Create a project

The code of this project contains Maven and Gradle build files that are functionally equivalent.

=== With Gradle

Here is the content of the `build.gradle.kts` file that you should be using:

[source,kotlin,role="collapsed"]
----
include::build.gradle.kts[]
----

=== With Maven

[source,xml,role="collapsed"]
----
include::pom.xml[]
----

== Writing the service

The service exposes a HTTP server and fits within a single Java class:

[source,java]
----
include::src/main/java/io/vertx/howtos/openj9/Main.java[]
----

We can run the service:

----
$ ./gradlew run
----

> We can also build a JAR archive will all dependencies bundled, then execute it:

Reviewer: Move the `shadowJar` instruction down before you instruct to run the JAR with `java -jar`

----
$ ./gradlew shadowJar
$ java -jar build/libs/openj9-howto-all.jar
----

and then test it with https://httpie.org/[HTTPie]:

----
$ http :8080/sum a:=1 b:=2
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
content-length: 9

{
    "sum": 3
}

$
----

== Improving startup time

The micro-service reports the startup time by measuring the time between the `main` method entry, and the callback notification when the HTTP server has started.

> We can do a few runs of `java -jar build/libs/openj9-howto-all.jar` and pick the best time.

Reviewer: Clarify here if you're talking about running with Hotspot or J9 without config. If you're talking about running J9 without config, can you add a note about configuring the `PATH` before.

The first run is typical costly, but then all subsequent runs will benefit from the caches, which are also regularly updated.

The relevant OpenJ9 flags are the following:

- `-Xshareclasses`: enable class sharing
- `-Xshareclasses:name=NAME`: a name for the cache, typically one per-application
- `-Xshareclasses:cacheDir=DIR`: a folder for storing the cache files

Let us have a few run of:

----
$ java -Xshareclasses -Xshareclasses:name=sum -Xshareclasses:cacheDir=_cache -jar build/libs/openj9-howto-all.jar
----

On my machine the first run takes *1098ms*, which is way more than *639ms*!
However the next runs are all near *300ms*, with a best score of *293ms* which is very good for a JVM application start time.

== Memory usage

=== Generate some workload

We are using Locust to generate some workload.
The `locustfile.py` file contains the code to simulate users that perform sums of random numbers:

[source,python]
----
include::locustfile.py[]
----

We can then run `locust`, and connect to http://localhost:8089 to start a test.
Let us simulate 2000 users with a 50 new users per second hatch rate.
This gives us about 600 requests per second.

=== Measuring RSS

> The https://quarkus.io/guides/performance-measure[Quarkus team has a good guide on measuring RSS].

Reviewer: So the link to the `lengthy` article is nice :wink:

But can we get a TL;DR here to take our own measurements?

By letting Locust operate with 2000 users for a few minutes, I get a RSS of about *96 MB*.

With OpenJDK 11 and no tuning, I get a RSS of about *247 MB*.

Let us use OpenJDK 11 again but now with some limits:

----
$ java -Xmx32m -Xss256k -jar build/libs/openj9-howto-all.jar
----

RSS usage goes to *124 MB* on my machine.

Now let us go back to OpenJ9 with a similar configuration:

----
$ java -Xmx32m -Xss256k -Xshareclasses -Xshareclasses:name=sum -Xshareclasses:cacheDir=_cache -jar build/libs/openj9-howto-all.jar
----

RSS usage is about *73 MB* on my machine.

== Building and running a Docker image

Ok so we have seen how gentle OpenJ9 was on memory even without tuning.
Let us now package the micro-service as a Docker image.

Here is the `Dockerfile` you can use:

[source,text]
----
include::Dockerfile[]
----

You can note:

- `-Xvirtualized` is a flag for virtualized / container environments so OpenJ9 reduces CPU consumption when idle
- `/app/_cache` is a volume that will have to be mounted for containers to share the OpenJ9 classes cache.

The image can be built as in:

----
$ docker build . -t openj9-app
----

We can then create containers from the image:

----

> $ docker run -it --rm -v /tmp/_cache:/app/_cache -p 8080:8080 openj9-app

Reviewer: On some platforms with `cgroups` active the container cannot access the shared classes directory. They will get an error like:

```
JVMSHRC226E Error opening shared class cache file 
JVMSHRC336E Port layer error code = -102
JVMSHRC337E Platform error message: Permission denied
JVMJ9VM015W Initialization error for library j9shr29(11): JVMJ9VM009E J9VMDllMain failed
Error: Could not create the Java Virtual Machine.
Error: A fatal exception has occurred. Program will exit.
```

Can you add a `TIP` about this and say they can relax the check with `-v /tmp/_cache:/app/_cache:z`

Author: 👍
